Wave 4: install the teeth, and make the merge verb an artifact
==============================================================
## Wave 4: install the teeth, and make the merge verb an artifact

Living wave Paper for WAVE 4 of the Honest Gates epic (root task
auth-totp-tests-are-time-boundary-flaky, priority 0). Charter:
.claude/workflows/bp-honest-gates-charter.md on origin/main @ f38c01920 — 246
lines, D1-D49. Predecessor Papers: gates-tell-the-truth-wave-2026-07-20 (wave
1), honest-gates-wave-2026-07-27 (wave 2), honest-gates-wave-2026-07-28 (wave
3). Every later phase appends HERE — Digest adds the survey digest and the
verify plan before the verifiers fly; Decide adds the decisions and the slice
roster before the builders fly; Review closes it as the debrief.

STATUS: Strategize complete — the wave is SURVEYING. The direction below is
committed in shape and tentative in its details; two exploration rounds (survey,
then verify) precede Decide.

## The wish

Run wave 4 and close hgw2-s7-enable-branch-protection. Three consecutive waves
have deferred it, each with a better reason than the last, and every one of
those reasons is now paid off. The plain sentence that has survived every wave
must not survive this one: nothing in this repo is required-by-name, and every
ratchet waves 1-3 built is ADVISORY.

DONE MEANS: branches/main/protection returns 200 with enforce_admins.enabled
true and the required contexts pinned; a throwaway PR with a RED required check
has gh pr merge --admin REFUSED and the refusal quoted; the same PR merges once
green; the fleet has a documented, working merge verb that is not --admin; and a
break-glass exists that is one attributable command down, one back, and
impossible to leave open silently.

Also in scope: close hgw2-s5-ci-verdict-reader honestly (PR #6414 is green and
the lead will merge it), and DECIDE the claim-lease false red rather than
documenting it again.

## Ground truth, re-derived at Strategize (2026-07-28, origin/main @ f38c01920)

Every row below was measured in this phase against live GitHub or the live
ledger. Nothing here is inherited on trust.

Protection state
branches/main/protection = 404 Branch not protected; rulesets = []
D13 still stands verbatim. The wave's whole reason.
Repo merge flags
allow_auto_merge false, allow_squash_merge true, delete_branch_on_merge false,
user-owned public repo
Auto-merge is a repo-setting change, not a per-PR one. User-owned kills merge
queue AND may kill the audit log the break-glass wants.
PROCESS RULE 2 citation
bp-loop-ledger.md line 43 reads verbatim: 'This repo does NOT allow gh
auto-merge — poll checks + gh pr merge --squash --admin'
The cited authority EXISTS and COVERS what it is cited for. Premise smoke: PASS.
Committed spec
.github/required-checks.json on main: enforced false, two checks pinned to
app_id 15368 — 'Elixir gate' and 'PR references an active task', with 10
reasoned exclusions
The apply tooling and the spec exist. This wave regenerates and flips, it does
not rebuild.
Fleet freeze, re-derived
15 open PRs. 4 render 'Elixir gate' (#6631 #6551 #6498 #6414). 11 render ZERO.
All 15 render 'PR references an active task'.
The unfreeze is 11 PRs, not 12, and the two names have RADICALLY different
freeze costs.
Skip-shim throughput, live
PR #6414: 'Elixir gate' concluded success in 2 SECONDS; four Elixir jobs
'skipping'
Requiring Elixir gate is ~13m39s only on api-touching PRs. On everything else it
is seconds. This materially weakens the auto-merge necessity argument.
Main's own health
'Elixir gate' = success on the last three main shas whose runs actually
completed (b43f5d7f, c8897f81, ad3b6d56). Format advisory = failure on all
three.
The required name is main-green today. Format stays out (D10).
Main's queue collapse
11 of the last 12 main pushes have NO 'Elixir gate' conclusion at all — elixir
runs at 11:40-11:42Z are 'cancelled' by queue collapse (D28 SUPERSEDED shape)
Criterion 10's 'main-green' must be read on shas whose run COMPLETED, or it
reads a false red. Protection is unaffected: it evaluates PR heads.
Sobelow
security.yml runs green on main pushes (27352d8c, c0d27a0d) after the Felix
inline-annotation migration
Irrelevant to protection either way — security.yml is paths-filtered and
structurally disqualified. Any plan treating Sobelow greenness as a precondition
is wrong.
Legacy Vercel poison
commits/f38c01920/status = failure; 'Vercel – demo' and 'Vercel – barkpark' (EN
DASH) failure on every sha
The spec correctly uses checks with app_id, never contexts. A required set
containing either is an instant deadlock.
The lapse grace is ALREADY exceeded, live
hgw2-s5-ci-verdict-reader: lifecycle open, claim.previous_worker lead-w3-land,
claim.expired_at 2026-07-28T05:08:01Z — about 6h37m ago against a 21600s (6h)
grace
The task gate would RED #6414 on its next fire. Requiring it today knowingly
installs a false red. This is the lease decision, and it is not hypothetical.
The reap DOES stamp
hgw2-s5's claim carries previous_worker + expired_at + worker:null; hgw2-s2
carries released_at (the D23 ordering clause's real shape)
D23's predicate is REACHABLE. The hole is the grace WIDTH, not the mechanism.
Preconditions
hgw3-s7-charter-via-pr open 0/7; hgw2-s4-format-ceiling-reland open 0/12;
hg-bl-enable-auto-merge-under-protection open 0/4 (a CHILD of s7); both D49
hotfix backlog items open
hgw3-s7 is a hard precondition (D39). The format ceiling is NOT — see the
direction.
Claim
Measured
What it changes

## The direction: protection ships, and the merge protocol ships as an ARTIFACT,
not a sentence

Wave 3 framed the blocker as 'protection needs a merge-protocol replacement.'
That framing is right and incomplete. The replacement it proposed — rewrite
PROCESS RULE 2 — is a SENTENCE, and this epic's own charter law says a slice is
not done without part three: the population and the ratchet. A sentence has
neither. D48 is the proof already in the record: the same merge folklore occurs
253 times across 68 files and its highest-leverage copy lives OUTSIDE the repo
where no builder and no CI guard can reach it. A prose merge protocol is exactly
the kind of predicate this epic exists to abolish — one that cannot be executed,
cannot be tested, and cannot be proven able to fail.

So the centrepiece of this wave is not the PUT. The PUT is four minutes of work
with tooling that already exists and is mutation-proven. The centrepiece is that
THE FLEET'S MERGE VERB BECOMES A SINGLE EXECUTABLE ARTIFACT, and every prose
site collapses into a pointer at it.

What the finished experience looks like. An agent finishes a slice, pushes, and
runs one command — the sanctioned merge verb. It runs the deadlock detector
FIRST (set difference of the committed spec against the check runs actually
rendered on the head, exit 3 as a third state), so a PR that can never merge is
refused in seconds with the missing context NAMED — something GitHub itself will
never tell you at N=2, where the refusal reads '2 of 2 required status checks
are expected.' and names nothing. If the PR is merely not-yet-green, the verb
waits within a bounded budget and merges the moment it goes green; if the wait
exceeds the budget it hands off to GitHub's own auto-merge and says so. If a
required check is genuinely red, it refuses and quotes the refusal. If the
ledger is down, it says the ledger is down and names the exit. The agent never
types --admin, never types --auto, and never has to know which of GitHub's six
refusal shapes it is looking at. Every one of those shapes maps to one row of an
enumerated exit table, and every row has one command.

And the break-glass is not a curl. A curl cannot be attributed on a user-owned
repo and cannot be prevented from being left open. The break-glass becomes a
script that CANNOT OPEN WITHOUT WRITING A RECORD: it refuses without a reason
and a task id, writes the record to the ledger first, then DELETEs
enforce_admins — and while it is open, the required-checks verify guard reds in
CI, so the repo itself screams until it is closed. One attributable command
down, one back, impossible to leave open silently — the wish's words, satisfied
mechanically rather than by discipline.

The choices I lean toward, tentatively:

- BOTH names on day one, as the committed spec already pins: 'Elixir gate' + 'PR
references an active task'. D43's refusal of a ratchet-free required set stands,
and Elixir gate is where every ratchet waves 1-3 built actually rides.

- hgw3-s7-charter-via-pr is a HARD precondition and ships in round 1. D39 is L1:
protection rejects a direct push with GH006, and 12.7% of main arrives that way
from the epic-cycle's own Decide phase. Without it, every concurrent wave hangs
at Decide the day the flip lands.

- hgw2-s4-format-ceiling-reland is NOT a precondition and must not gate the
flip. It adds a blocking job to the aggregator's needs, which changes Elixir
gate's COMPOSITION, not the required NAME. It carries its own hazard in the
other direction (a stale roster reds the required context repo-wide), so it
lands BEFORE the flip with a fresh roster or it is explicitly deferred with the
hazard named — never squeezed in after.

- The lease gets DECIDED, not documented, and it is a hard sibling of the flip
rather than a nice-to-have. The 6h grace is already exceeded on a live PR's own
task. Requiring the task gate on top of a predicate we have measured to be
currently false is installing a known false red — the epic's disease inside the
epic's own flip.

- allow_auto_merge: lean YES, but as a MECHANISM the artifact invokes behind a
mandatory pre-flight, never as a protocol agents type. The wave decides it on
evidence (the api-PR ratio, real merge dwell) and adopts
hg-bl-enable-auto-merge-under-protection rather than re-filing it (D14).

- The fleet unfreeze is executed and evidenced, not asserted — with one
measurement first that could collapse its cost by an order of magnitude (survey
key unfreeze-cost).

bullet

What to prioritise if the wave has to choose. The flip beats everything, and the
flip is cheap. The merge verb beats the format ceiling. The lease decision beats
the format ceiling. The format ceiling is the thing to drop.

## The direction debate: four rivals, argued

RIVAL 1 — FLIP AND FOLLOW. Install protection with the two names; the
merge-protocol replacement is 'delete one flag' (D40 measured that a plain gh pr
merge --squash merges under enforce_admins:true the moment the required context
goes green); rewrite PROCESS RULE 2; decide auto-merge NO. Smallest possible
change, lowest blast radius, ships in one round.

Why it loses. It is the wave-3 plan with the deferral removed, and it repeats a
mistake the charter already documented. A prose-only merge verb has no
population step and no ratchet, and D48 measured what happens to prose in this
fleet: 253 occurrences, 68 files, and the one that reaches every session
automatically lives in a different repository. Worse, it leaves each agent to
interpret GitHub's refusal themselves — and D38 measured that at N=2 the refusal
names NOTHING, and that a deadlock and a red are only distinguishable by a set
difference nobody is doing. An agent that cannot tell a deadlock from a red,
holding a token with admin rights, will open the glass. That is D13 a fifth time
by a different door.

RIVAL 2 — THE MERGE VERB BECOMES AN ARTIFACT (the winner). Same flip; the
deliverable is one executable merge verb plus one executable break-glass, both
harnessed and mutation-proven, and every prose site — bp-loop-ledger.md:43,
.claude/agents/felix.md:44, connectors/README.md:189, docs/ops/merge-gates.md,
and the out-of-repo memory file as a lead action — repointed at them.

Why it wins. It is the only rival that satisfies the epic's own acceptance law.
CAUSE: protection installed with enforce_admins true. POPULATION: every merge
path in the fleet repointed, not the one sentence that happened to be cited.
RATCHET: the verb's own harness, the break-glass that cannot open silently, the
verify guard that reds while it is open, and a tripwire that reds if --admin
reappears as a sanctioned verb. It also converts the auto-merge question from a
fleet-wide behavioural change into an implementation detail behind a pre-flight
— which is precisely how to absorb the sharpest objection against it.

RIVAL 3 — STAGE THE TEETH: protect with ONE name today, add the second once the
fleet is unfrozen. Genuinely attractive: it kills the plain sentence within the
hour and makes a fifth deferral structurally impossible, because protection
would already be installed when the unfreeze work begins. The obvious staging is
'task gate first' — it renders on 15 of 15 open PRs, so the freeze cost is ZERO,
it re-fires without a push (D43), and its p50/p90 are 16s/57s.

Why it loses, and why its INVERSE survives as a fallback. Task-gate-first is the
worst possible single name: it is the ONE required context whose verdict depends
on guerrilla, a host measured at 2.8-10.3s under concurrent waves that 500s
outright on large payloads, and whose lapse predicate is measurably false RIGHT
NOW on hgw2-s5. Requiring it alone means one ledger outage deadlocks the entire
repository with no other check to reason from, and D49's only documented exit —
the hotfix! label — needs a push to engage and records nothing. The INVERSE
staging (Elixir gate only on day one, task gate second) is strictly safer: it
depends on GitHub alone. It survives as the wave's fallback if the unfreeze or
the lease decision proves more expensive than measured — but it is not the plan,
because both names are already pinned in a spec that was generated,
selection-tested across 8 heads of different path shapes, and reviewed.

RIVAL 4 — FIX THE LEASE AND THE HOTFIX BREAK-GLASS FIRST, FLIP NEXT WAVE.
Honest-sounding: do not require a gate you have measured to be currently lying.
Rejected as deferral #5 wearing a lab coat. The lease fix is a predicate change
in one script with an existing 62-fixture harness; it is a SIBLING of the flip,
not a prerequisite round. Sequencing it as a prerequisite is exactly the move
that produced three better-reasoned deferrals.

## The sharpest attack on the winner, and how the wave absorbs it

THE ATTACK. 'The merge verb as an artifact' introduces a new mandatory tool to a
fleet of roughly 250 agent-runs a day that reads prose and acts on habit. D26 is
the charter's own warning: a harness nobody runs is not a ratchet. If agents
keep typing gh pr merge --squash --admin from muscle memory, the artifact
changes nothing — except that now the habitual command FAILS LOUDLY, and the
agent's most natural recovery, holding a token with repo admin, is to open the
glass. The wave would then have built a beautifully-harnessed verb nobody uses
and a break-glass everybody does. That is D13 a fifth time, installed by the
wave that was supposed to end it.

HOW THE WAVE ABSORBS IT. Four ways, and they are acceptance criteria, not
intentions.

- GRACEFUL DEGRADATION. The verb is a THIN wrapper. If an agent ignores it
entirely and runs a plain gh pr merge --squash, that still works and still
respects protection — D40 measured it. The artifact adds pre-flight and waiting;
it does not add a required dependency. Only --admin breaks, and only when it
should.

- THE POPULATION LANDS IN THE SAME SESSION AS THE FLIP. Not the same wave — the
same session. The three live agent-facing prose sites plus merge-gates.md ship
in the flip's own PR, and the out-of-repo memory file is a named LEAD ACTION
executed alongside, because no builder worktree can reach it (D48).

- THE GLASS IS DELIBERATELY HIGHER-FRICTION THAN THE CORRECT PATH. Merging
correctly is one command with no arguments. Opening the glass demands a reason
and a task id, writes a record before it acts, and makes CI red until it is
closed. The friction gradient must point at the correct path, and that is
testable.

- ADOPTION IS MEASURED, NOT ASSUMED. 'The same PR merges once green'
generalises: the wave does not close until real fleet merges have gone through
the new verb and the audit of what actually happened is in the debrief. If the
fleet routes around the verb, that is a finding this wave must report, not one
the next wave discovers.

bullet

A second, quieter attack worth naming: requiring 'PR references an active task'
makes LEDGER HYGIENE a merge blocker on a host that degrades. The wave's answer
is that this is a real cost accepted with eyes open, bounded by the lease
decision and by an enumerated outage exit — and that the fallback staging
(Elixir gate only) exists precisely for the case where survey shows guerrilla's
availability cannot support it.

## The survey plan — 17 assignments

Width now buys precise depth later. Each assignment names what would change in
the plan if the answer surprises us. Several are direct attacks on load-bearing
assumptions of the winning direction.

unfreeze-cost
Does a PUSH — even an empty commit — make a pre-shim PR head render 'Elixir
gate'? GitHub runs pull_request workflows from the MERGE ref, so main's
elixir.yml may already apply. Probe it on a real open PR.
D43 priced the unfreeze at 5 cheap rebases plus 6 conflict-heavy ones. If an
empty commit suffices, the unfreeze collapses from hours to minutes and stops
being a scheduling constraint at all.
pr-path-mix
Over the last 7 days of merged PRs: what fraction touch the api path sets
(paying about 13m39s) vs skip in seconds? Real dwell distribution from open to
merge.
This is the entire evidential basis of the auto-merge decision. #6414's Elixir
gate concluded in 2s; if that is the norm, the throughput cliff is a minority
case and auto-merge is optional ergonomics.
automerge-safety
Attack --auto directly: does GitHub re-evaluate required checks at merge time;
what happens with stacked branches merging out of order; what does
allow_auto_merge:true expose repo-wide; can it be scoped per-PR; what is the
observable difference from poll-then-merge.
The wish's sharpest objection. If --auto genuinely widens what lands unattended,
the artifact must not use it and the wave says so with evidence.
merge-verb-population
Enumerate EVERY place in the repo, in .claude/**, in workflows, and in
agent-facing prose that performs or prescribes a PR merge. Which are live
agent-facing vs historical churn (D48 says 3 of 253).
This is the population step. An unenumerated population is the epic's own
disease.
breakglass-attributability
On a USER-owned repo, what record does GitHub keep of a protection change? Is
there any audit log, events feed, or webhook? Test a real DELETE/POST cycle on a
throwaway base and look for the trace.
Criterion 8 says attributability is 'checked in the org audit log rather than
assumed'. If a user-owned repo has no org audit log, that criterion is
UNSATISFIABLE as written and the break-glass MUST write its own record.
verify-guard-liveness
Run scripts/required-checks-verify.sh in all four modes today, plus --selftest.
Does it RED when enforce_admins is off live while the spec says true? Does
required-checks-drift.yml actually run, and on what?
Criterion 8's 'the verify guard reds while it is open' is the mechanism that
makes the glass impossible to leave open silently. If it does not red, the
break-glass design changes.
lease-honest-predicate
Measure the real population of task-gate reds today and classify them. How often
does a lapse exceed 6h under real review dwell? Does a re-claim erase
previous_worker (charter says claim.ex:297-304 rebuilds the map)? What predicate
is BOTH honest and falsifiable — wider grace, PR-linked exemption,
push-renews-lease, or something else?
hgw2-s5's claim lapsed about 6h37m ago against a 6h grace, live. The wave must
DECIDE this, and a decision needs the distribution, not one data point.
open-pr-triage
For all 15 open PRs: age, path shape, mergeability, which required names render,
and a rebase-or-close recommendation with a reason. Which are wave-log docs PRs
that could merge in seconds today?
The unfreeze is criterion 1 and must be evidenced per-PR. Several look like
stale wave-log docs PRs that a 30-second skip would land immediately.
direct-push-population
Map every path by which this fleet writes DIRECTLY to main: epic-cycle Decide,
grip ledger rows, charters, wave logs, memory files, any workflow. What exactly
does hgw3-s7-charter-via-pr need to change, and is its 7-criterion brief
complete against that map?
D39 is the single largest go/no-go. If the direct-push population is wider than
the epic-cycle's Decide phase, hgw3-s7 as filed is incomplete and the flip
breaks something nobody enumerated.
format-ceiling-state
Re-derive 0bf3b4551 against TODAY's main: conflict count, the drifted population
under the pinned 1.18.1, roster freshness. And specifically: what happens to the
REQUIRED context if the ceiling job lands with a stale roster AFTER protection?
D45 already refuted D33's conflict count once. This decides whether the ceiling
ships this wave, and quantifies the hazard of deferring it past the flip.
spec-regeneration
Run scripts/required-checks-generate.sh against current PR heads of different
path shapes. Do the same two names survive the five rejections plus the
selection stage? Any NEW poisoned or candidate names since
(sobelow-inline-overlap, required-checks-drift, the uninterpolated matrix names
visible on #6414)?
Criterion 4 demands regeneration in the flip's own PR. If a new name qualifies
or one stops qualifying, the day-one set changes.
main-green-reading
Main's queue collapse leaves most main shas with no Elixir gate conclusion (11
of 12 measured). Establish the honest 'main-green' reading for criterion 10, and
confirm queue collapse cannot affect protection's evaluation of PR heads.
Criterion 10 is discharged 'in its honest split form'. A naive reading of main's
last sha would report a false red and stall the flip for no reason.
ledger-availability
Probe guerrilla against the task gate specifically: 500s, timeouts, and the
200-with-null-result shape D49 flagged unreproduced. Does the merged
retry-then-fail path behave honestly under each? What is today's real
availability?
Requiring the task gate makes guerrilla a merge dependency. This decides whether
both names ship day one or the Elixir-gate-only fallback staging is taken.
hotfix-breakglass
State of hg-bl-hotfix-breakglass-records-nothing and
hg-bl-pr-task-gate-hotfix-label-norefire. Is BARKPARK_TASK_TOKEN provisionable
by this fleet? What is the minimum honest hotfix path that engages without a
push and records what it did?
D49 calls both hard prerequisites of s7. If BARKPARK_TASK_TOKEN cannot be
provisioned, the hotfix lane needs a different design or the required set must
not include the task gate.
prior-art
Search bp papers and tasks (not just this epic) for prior decisions on branch
protection, merge protocol, auto-merge, required checks, and merge wrappers
across ALL epics. Anything already decided that this wave would re-derive?
D14: adopt, never re-file. Re-deriving filed work is the documentation dimension
of the sample-scope disease.
aggregator-composition
What jobs feed 'Elixir gate' today, what the allow-set accepts, and what happens
to the required context if a new blocking job lands wired into needs but not
into decide (the D36 shape) — or wired correctly but with a red roster.
Under protection, one bad job wiring reds the required name on EVERY PR
repo-wide. The blast radius of an aggregator mistake changes the day the flip
lands.
concurrency-fence
Confirm nothing else in flight touches .github/**, scripts/*gate*, or
.claude/workflows/**. Check open PRs, live worktrees, and the concurrent Cloud
Console wave (fence cloud/**, gr-*/cch-*).
A concurrent edit to elixir.yml or the gate scripts during the flip is the one
collision that could deadlock the repo for everyone.
Key
Question
Why it changes the plan

This Paper is the wave's living record. Digest appends the survey digest and the
verify plan BEFORE the verifiers fly. Decide appends the decisions and the slice
roster BEFORE the builders fly. Review closes it as the debrief. Tasks driven:
hgw2-s7-enable-branch-protection (P0), hgw3-s7-charter-via-pr,
hgw2-s4-format-ceiling-reland (P2), hgw2-s5-ci-verdict-reader,
hg-bl-enable-auto-merge-under-protection,
hg-bl-hotfix-breakglass-records-nothing,
hg-bl-pr-task-gate-hotfix-label-norefire.

## Survey digest — 17 reports, zero coverage deficit

The plain sentence still stands, re-derived this phase against origin/main @
f38c01920:
strong
branches/main/protection
code
returns 404,
rulesets
code
returns [],
allow_auto_merge
code
is false. All nine code sites the wave builds on exist on origin/main. D13, D17,
D39, D40, D43, D48 and D49 were git-shown and read for coverage, not merely
cited.

The survey did not confirm the plan. It corrected it in five places, and two of
those corrections change what ships.
strong

## 1. The flip has a day-one deadlock, and it is bigger than the direction
assumed

Three independent surveyors re-derived the same split: 4 of 15 open PR heads
render
Elixir gate
code
; 11 render it zero times; 15/15 render the task gate. The cause is now
precisely dated — the
Elixir gate
code
aggregator did not exist before 2c7f864eb (#6411) at 2026-07-28 00:44:48 +0200.
Of 45 recently-merged api-touching PRs, only 12 render the aggregator, and all
12 merged at or after 00:35Z.

A required context that never renders is a DEADLOCK, not a red. GitHub reports
it as expected-and-waiting with no way to satisfy it, and at N=2 the refusal
names nothing (D38). If the flip lands before the 11 are rebased or closed, they
become unmergeable by any means short of removing protection — D13 a fifth time,
by the exact door this wave fears.

THE OPEN HINGE.
strong
D43's verbatim text on origin/main states the reason as head-file semantics: "a
pull_request
code
run executes the workflow file on the HEAD and no pre-shim head contains the
job." The unfreeze-cost surveyor challenges that reason using the repo's own
measured statement at
elixir.yml:93-105
code
— GitHub checks a
pull_request
code
job out on
refs/pull/N/merge
code
, "a commit that already contains main's advance." If the run executes on the
merge ref, the workflow definition read is the MERGED one, and an empty commit
on a mergeable frozen PR would render the aggregator in seconds.
Nobody ran the probe.
strong
It is 30 seconds of work and it decides whether the unfreeze is a scheduling
constraint or a footnote.

Either way the unfreeze splits by MERGEABILITY, not by shim-age. 4 of the 11 are
MERGEABLE (#6055, #6053, #6028, #5754); 7 are CONFLICTING (#6086, #6057, #5951,
#5922, #5918, #5901, #2907) and no push can produce a computable merge ref for
them. Protection adds no new blocker to the conflicting tier — they cannot merge
under any setting — but it will read as "protection broke 7 PRs" unless named in
advance. Independent triage recommends 3 merges today, 4 real rebases, and 8
closes.

## 2. The auto-merge objection is factually inverted — but the throughput
argument for it also fails

The wish's sharpest objection was that
--auto
code
widens what lands unattended. Measured, it does not. Ten PRs merged into main in
72 seconds today, all sharing
baseRefOid b43f5d7f
code
, onto a main that had moved. PR #6617 merged 40 minutes after its checks
completed, unattended, with Sobelow at conclusion FAILURE. That is TODAY'S
baseline under
--admin
code
. Stale-base unattended landing is a property of strict:false plus concurrency,
not of
--auto
code
— and
--auto
code
cannot merge over a red REQUIRED context, where
--admin
code
can and did. The repo has exactly ONE collaborator, so the actor set that could
queue an auto-merge is identical to the set that can already merge. The
repo-wide exposure delta is nil.

But the survivability argument for
--auto
code
also collapses. 71.9% of 462 PRs merged in 7 days skip the Elixir suite
entirely; today it is 80.6%. The aggregator itself always concludes in 2-5
seconds. The blocking wall clock is 31 seconds when the suite skips and a median
13.1m when it runs — against a median PR dwell of 21.9 minutes that is already
longer than the gate. Wave 3's "~16m36s per PR" conflated the job with the suite
and overstated how many PRs pay it.

Both findings point the same way, and it is the direction's tentative choice:
adopt
strong
allow_auto_merge
code
as a MECHANISM the artifact invokes on the over-budget branch, never as a
protocol agents type.
strong
Two mitigations are mandatory, not optional: the pre-flight deadlock detector
must run FIRST (on a never-reporting context
--admin
code
refuses loudly while
--auto
code
queues silently forever), and
expectedHeadOid
code
must always be pinned — a write-holder's own follow-up push does NOT cancel a
queued merge, so without the pin a merge can outlive its agent and land a commit
the agent never saw.

## 3. Two acceptance criteria are unsatisfiable as written, and both must be
rewritten in this wave's PR

Criterion 8's audit-log check cannot exist.
strong
A surveyor ran the full PUT / DELETE enforce_admins / POST cycle on a throwaway
branch and then hunted every trace surface.
/repos/.../events
code
,
/users/FRIKKern/events
code
and
/repos/.../activity
code
recorded NOTHING for the protection writes. All three audit-log endpoints 404 —
the repo owner is a User, so no org audit log can exist. Zero webhooks are
installed. The protection object itself carries no actor and no timestamp: you
cannot even read WHEN protection last changed. Writing "assumed attributable via
GitHub" would be the exact false-predicate class this epic abolishes.

The one positive: repository RULESETS are self-attributing on a user repo —
/rulesets/{id}/history
code
returned actor id plus millisecond timestamps for both a create and an edit.
Caveat measured: deleting the ruleset destroys its history, so a guard must
assert the ruleset EXISTS with the expected enforcement, never that history
looks clean. This is a real option but a mechanism change late in the wave; the
mutation-proven
required-checks-*.sh
code
target classic protection.

"The verify guard reds in CI while the glass is open" is FALSE as the repo
stands.
strong
The SCRIPT is healthy — all four modes exit 0 today, the 12-clause selftest is
mutation-proven, and with the spec at enforced=true against a live
enforce_admins:false it exits 1 naming the drift. But the CI job carrying it is
triply defanged:
continue-on-error: true
code
at JOB level (
required-checks-drift.yml:51
code
), paths-filtered on BOTH triggers so it never runs on an api-only PR, and
carrying no
schedule:
code
and no
workflow_dispatch
code
. A glass opened at 14:00 can go unobserved for days. All six historical runs
report success; no run has ever demonstrated a failing report reaching a human.
The break-glass scream must be BUILT this wave, not assumed.
strong

And the naive fix is a trap the workflow's own header warns about: dropping
continue-on-error
code
from the whole job re-imports API-blip fragility at the moment protection goes
live. Split the enforce_admins clause into its own blocking surface; do not flip
the flag.

## 4. The lease is a NUMBER problem wearing a mechanism costume — and it is
already red

D23 lapsed-claim acceptance already SHIPPED (#6413, be8ea92c0).
LAPSE_GRACE_SECONDS=21600
code
is live at
pr-task-gate.sh:120
code
with a four-way discrimination that still fails a released claim, a
never-claimed task and an unreadable expiry. So the question is not "accept
lapsed claims" — that is done. It is: raise the number, renew the lease, or
change the predicate.

The premise that review dwell is the cause is measured WRONG.
strong
Of 44 task-gate reds in 48h: 14 are wave-3's own synthetic probe branches, 18
ran a PRE-GRACE script (the grace landed 00:44 and those heads predate it), 5
are real post-grace lapse reds, 4 never claimed, 1 no claim, 2
ledger-unreachable. Of the 5 real lapse reds the ages are 6h22m, 11h31m, 1d12h,
4d18h and 13d18h — and FOUR of five are charter/wave-log PRs pointing at a
long-lived EPIC or GOAL task that nobody will ever re-claim, because workers
claim slices, not goals. A grace wide enough to cover them is fourteen days,
i.e. no grace at all. Raising the number rescues 1 of 5.

It is red RIGHT NOW.
strong
Running the real gate against the real ledger this phase:
FAIL: task 'hgw2-s5-ci-verdict-reader' is 'open': the claim by 'lead-w3-land'
lapsed 25024s ago, beyond the 21600s grace.
code
That is 6h57m against a 6h grace — past it, not approaching it. Requiring
PR references an active task
code
today installs a knowingly-false red on #6414, the one PR the wave means to
land, and on 8 of 15 open PRs including #6631 and #6498 which are otherwise
clean.

Two mechanical facts narrow the fix. A re-claim REPLACES the whole claim map (
claim.ex:297-304
code
builds a fresh literal,
:316
code
Map.puts it), destroying previous_worker — but
renew
code
MERGES (
claim.ex:378-381
code
). And a TTL reap deliberately PRESERVES
content.assignee
code
(
ttl_sweeper.ex:393
code
) — a durable ownership field that survives reaps indefinitely, which the gate
never reads. A CI-side renew is refuted by the gate's own comment at
pr-task-gate.sh:295-300
code
: it would bump the epoch and fence the holder out of their own close.

## 5. The merge-verb population is far smaller than D48's number, and it has ONE
caller

The 253-occurrences / 68-files figure is the
Elixir Test
code
stale-NAME census, not the merge-verb population — two surveyors independently
failed to reproduce it as a merge-verb count. Re-derived:
git grep -c 'gh pr merge'
code
is 20 hits across 16 files, of which nine are frozen .omx experiment fixtures
and four are wave-3 ledger evidence that must NOT be rewritten. The genuinely
live agent-facing in-repo population is FOUR sites, and only one of them ORDERS
a merge.

No script, Makefile target or workflow in this repo performs a merge, and
strong
bp-epic-cycle.workflow.js:851
code
says "Do NOT merge — the lead merges."
strong
Reinforced at :141, :167 and :794, and verbatim in
wild-bulk-cycle.workflow.js:100. So the artifact lands in an empty namespace
with no migration — and its real caller class is the LEAD, not the fleet. That
is good for the flip (one caller, one doc home) and bad for reach: the lead's
instructions come almost entirely from a git repo rooted at
/Users/pelle
code
that no worktree and no CI guard can reach.

The out-of-repo population is SEVEN files, not one. The charter's lead-action
note names only
always-merge-prs.md
code
and undercounts by six:
pr-task-gate-lease-lapse.md:11
code
(prescribes claim-then-
--admin
code
as THE lease remedy — the exact verb protection kills),
repo-concurrent-worktrees-bp-volatile.md:17
code
,
enterprise-ready-auth-epic.md:78
code
,
doc-maintenance-system.md:22
code
,
instance-lifecycle-admin.md:20
code
, and — escaping every
gh pr merge
code
grep because it contains no merge command —
dont-merge-before-elixir-test.md
code
, which is auto-loaded into every session and whose core claim ("no branch
protection here means the gate is self-discipline, not enforced") INVERTS on the
flip.

## 6. Five smaller corrections that change slice scope

- THE STALE-SHA REGENERATION HAZARD, newly found and silent. Stage 1 of the
generator takes a strict INTERSECTION across sampled shas. Mixing one pre-#6411
head silently downgrades the required set to ONE name — proven by running it:
--sha cff46a98 --sha 4f80c433 emits only the task gate, with no warning and no
non-zero exit. Only 3 of 15 open PR heads postdate #6411, so the obvious
sampling pool would quietly halve the teeth. The flip PR must pin
post-2026-07-28 00:44 heads AND assert Elixir gate is in the output before the
PUT.

- THE AGGREGATOR'S GATE-ARGUMENT HOLE. D36's needs_without_decide guard keys
ONLY on decide()'s second positional argument; the THIRD (the gate value) is
asserted nowhere. A job gated on compile=='true' but decided with gate NEVER
passes every fact and every cardinality, then reds Elixir gate on every
docs-only PR forever. The mirror silently greens. This survives the entire guard
and is the mistake the next new job is most likely to make.

- hgw3-s7 IS NECESSARY AND NOT SUFFICIENT. Its file scope is exactly the two
epic-cycle files. But CLAUDE.md:87-96 mandates a session-ending direct push and
says verbatim 'If push fails, resolve and retry until it succeeds' — under
protection that instructs agents to fight GH006 in an infinite loop. The same
rule lives again in ~/.claude/CLAUDE.md, outside the repo. The direct-push rate
is also re-derived HIGHER than D39's 12.7%: 13.7% over 7 days, 18.2% in 24h,
across THREE distinct actors, and 10 of 62 touch code.

- THE hotfix! LABEL DOES NOT EXIST. gh label list --limit 200 returns no hotfix
label. D49's 'named exit today' is not merely push-gated and silent — it is
inapplicable. And the auto-file would file an invisible DRAFT even with a token.
The recommended replacement needs no provisioning at all: record into GitHub
with the built-in GITHUB_TOKEN (three workflows in this repo already do exactly
that), and FAIL LOUD rather than warn-and-pass.

- BARKPARK_TASK_TOKEN SHOULD NOT BE PROVISIONED. The fleet CAN set the secret
(gh auth is FRIKKern with repo+workflow and repo ADMIN). But bp exposes no
token-mint verb, so the only credential available is the fleet's own
auth_tier:admin guerrilla token — in a PUBLIC repo's Actions secrets. 'As narrow
as the API allows' is unachievable. Delete the auto-file path instead.

## 7. What the survey SETTLED, so no builder re-derives it

- Guerrilla is not the risk. 1550 unauthenticated reads across six load levels:
zero timeouts, zero 200-with-null, worst latency 1.56s against a 20s cap. Rate
limiting starts between -P 10 and -P 25 from ONE IP; the gate makes one GET per
PR event from IP-diverse runners. No retry to tune, no caching layer, no
fallback host.

- The gate is honest in five of six degraded shapes: connection-refused, 503,
429 and a 200 with garbage all exit 2 UNCHECKED after bounded retry. Never a
silent green. The SIXTH — 200 with a well-formed null result — takes the
`missing` branch and DEFINITIVELY accuses a correct PR. And that branch is
reachable ONLY via 200-with-null, because a nonexistent id AND a
real-id/wrong-type read both return 404 handled elsewhere. So rerouting it to
UNCHECKED loses no true detection whatsoever.

- No security.yml check can ever be required — confirmed independently from the
spec's own exclusion list, which names both security.yml contexts as S4
PATHS-FILTERED. Sobelow's greenness is NOT a precondition for protection.
doc-gates.yml and go-tests.yml are likewise structurally disqualified.

- The main-green reading has an honest rule. Queue collapse on main is
DOCUMENTED, INTENDED behaviour (cancel-in-progress is explicitly false on main;
the comment says 'Queued main runs collapse to one'), and it is main-ref-scoped:
PR-ref elixir runs are 0 cancelled / 15 success / 1 real failure. Read the
newest main push whose elixir run reached a terminal non-cancelled conclusion.
Today that is 27352d8c1 and it is GREEN — while the naive tip read of f38c01920
returns no such check run and would be mis-narrated as a false red.

- The concurrency fence is clear on the critical path. NO open PR touches
elixir.yml, pr-task-gate.yml, required-checks.json or
scripts/required-checks-*.sh. No hg-* task carries a foreign claim. The
security.yml edit is already merged. ONE real collision: PR #6086 rewrites
bp-epic-cycle.workflow.js (+200/-17) — the same file, and the same line-726
region, that hgw3-s7 must rewrite.

- The format ceiling should be DROPPED, and deferring it costs nothing. Neither
.format-drift-ceiling nor scripts/format-drift-ceiling.sh exists on main, so the
required name's composition is untouched and there is no decay clock. Three
conflicts remain (D45 confirmed, D33's 'two' still wrong), the roster is 536
commits and 82 new files stale, and its un-wired shape is NOT the safe one — a
green unwired ceiling is a prime candidate for silent auto-promotion into the
required set on the next regeneration.

- The break-glass is ~70% built. required-checks-apply.sh already implements
both forms and refuses without --confirm; required-checks-verify.sh already
asserts enforce_admins.enabled == true. The deadlock detector ALSO already
exists on main as required-checks-verify.sh --deadlock, with exit 3 as a third
state, built for D38. The artifact must CALL these, never reimplement them
(D14).

## Coverage map — what was checked, and what was checked and NOT found

Absences below are decisions-in-waiting, not gaps in diligence. Every dispatched
surveyor reported; the coverage deficit was none.

branches/main/protection, rulesets, allow_auto_merge
NOT FOUND (404, [], false)
Re-derived by four independent surveyors. The plain sentence survives into this
wave.
gh label list --limit 200 for a hotfix label
NOT FOUND
The documented break-glass is inapplicable, not merely silent.
gh secret list / gh variable list for BARKPARK_TASK_TOKEN
NOT FOUND
And it should stay that way — no narrow token can be minted.
orgs/FRIKKern/audit-log, user/audit-log, repos/.../events for a protection write
NOT FOUND (404 / no entry)
Criterion 8 is unsatisfiable as written. Rewrite it in the flip's own PR.
repos/.../hooks
NOT FOUND ([])
The branch_protection_rule webhook exists in GitHub but nothing here receives
it.
A merge script in scripts/ or a gh pr merge in any workflow .js
NOT FOUND
The artifact lands in an empty namespace. No migration, no name collision.
A main-green stage in required-checks-generate.sh or -verify.sh
NOT FOUND
D42 asks for one; criterion 10 is discharged by hand today. Six lines closes it.
An auto_merge decision anywhere in docs/ops/merge-gates.md
NOT FOUND
s7 criterion 1's target section must be CREATED, not edited.
.format-drift-ceiling and scripts/format-drift-ceiling.sh on origin/main
NOT FOUND
The ceiling has never landed. Deferring it changes nothing.
A counterexample: a head lacking the shim that still rendered Elixir gate
NOT FOUND in 16 sampled shas
The corpus cannot separate head-file from merge-ref semantics. Only a probe can.
Required-check spec drift (advisory) in required-checks.json exclusions
NOT FOUND
drift.yml:14 claims it is named there. It is not — a live prose-vs-artifact gap.
decide()'s third positional argument in the D36 guard
NOT FOUND (unasserted)
A false-RED generator survives every existing guard.
check-run output.summary on the task gate
NOT FOUND (empty on 6 PRs)
An artifact classifying refusals by reading summaries reads blank and
misclassifies.
Elixir gate on any of the last 5 main heads
NOT FOUND
S5 red-on-main is structurally vacuous for the one name that matters most.
Checked
Result
What it means

Corners no surveyor reached, and the wave should know it:
strong
(1) the QueryController :show body — whether a 200-with-null is emittable
server-side at all is unresolved, and it decides reroute-vs-delete for the
gate's `missing` branch; (2) the two release workflows (cli-release.yml,
release-artifact.yml) were grepped for push verbs but not read line by line; (3)
working-tree dirtiness across the 1,545 worktrees was not checked — only which
ones diff a fenced path; (4) scripts/local-update.sh and
scripts/pds-window-sentinel.sh matched the push recipe but were never opened;
(5) whether any of the 6 deployment environments holds a secret was inherited,
not re-enumerated; (6) three cloud-shaped check names seen only on a stale head
were never traced to their workflow's on: block.

## Verify plan — the last look before the plan is cut

Ten assignments. Eight Opus, two Fable — Fable only where the answer is a
judgment whose cost of being wrong is a false red on a REQUIRED gate. Every
assignment names what it will RUN; reading is not proof.

1
unfreeze-probe
opus
Pushes an empty commit to a real MERGEABLE frozen PR (#5754) and reads gh pr
checks. Settles head-file vs merge-ref semantics — the single hinge under D43.
Also probes a CONFLICTING PR for the fail-closed dispatcher's RED.
2
breakglass-scream
fable
Mutates required-checks-verify to red and reads the resulting CHECK-RUN
conclusion under continue-on-error. Decides what firing surface the break-glass
scream needs, given the job is advisory + paths-filtered + unscheduled.
3
gate-arg-hole
opus
Mutation-proves the D36 hole in a worktree: wires a job with the WRONG third
decide() argument and confirms elixir-path-escape-check.sh --selftest still
passes 101/101.
4
lease-predicate
fable
Samples live guerrilla for assignee-vs-previous_worker agreement and re-derives
the 5 lapse reds. Decides P1 (assignee-backed) vs grace-widening vs
epic-delegation — a wrong call installs a false red on a required gate.
5
spec-freshness
opus
Runs required-checks-generate.sh against three post-#6411 heads, diffs against
the committed spec, re-reads the main-green rule at the tip, and re-scans all
open PRs for fenced-path edits. This is the immediately-pre-PUT check.
6
deadlock-detector-live
opus
Runs required-checks-verify.sh --deadlock against a REAL frozen head (one of the
11 rendering zero Elixir gate) and confirms exit 3 with the missing context
NAMED. The artifact's pre-flight depends on it and nobody has aimed it at a
frozen head.
7
automerge-wiring
opus
Flips allow_auto_merge, and proves on a throwaway PR whether gh pr merge --auto
--match-head-commit actually forwards expectedHeadOid to the ENABLE mutation.
The core mitigation depends on the answer.
8
refusal-exit-table
opus
Enumerates GitHub's refusal shapes against a throwaway PROTECTED branch and
proves the task gate's output.summary is empty — establishing what the artifact
can and cannot classify on.
9
directpush-scope
opus
Re-derives the direct-push population, opens the two unread push-recipe scripts,
and settles the PR #6086 collision with hgw3-s7 by diffing both against the same
file region.
10
ledger-null-origin
opus
Reads QueryController :show and runs a targeted unit test to establish whether a
200-with-null is emittable at all — deciding whether the gate's `missing` branch
is rerouted or deleted.
#
Key
Model
What it PROVES by running

The wave stands at: survey complete and digested, ten verifiers in flight.
Nothing is built yet. The flip has not happened; branches/main/protection still
returns 404 as of this writing.

## What verification proved, and the two premises it destroyed

Nine verifiers ran against live GitHub, a live ledger, and the real files. Zero
coverage deficit. Two of the direction's own load-bearing beliefs were refuted
by running them, and both refutations changed what ships. Every number below
names the tree and the load it was taken under.

## REFUTED: auto-merge's mandatory safety mitigation is a placebo

The direction called
expectedHeadOid
code
pinning a non-optional mitigation.
GitHub accepts it and ignores it.
strong
Proven end to end on a throwaway protected base:
GH_DEBUG=api
code
captured the literal ENABLE mutation carrying the pin, HTTP 200. The
write-holding actor then pushed
5738a149
code
; auto-merge
survived
strong
with
enabledAt
code
unchanged and zero
auto_merge_disabled
code
timeline events; the PR merged 3 seconds after the NEW head went green, and
squash commit
fbaeb5ed
code
contains
both
strong
files. Worse, the pin is unreadable afterwards: it is an input-only field, and
AutoMergeRequest
code
exposes exactly seven fields that do not include it. No artifact can ever verify
its own pin.

The throughput case collapsed independently:
71.9% of 462 PRs skip the Elixir suite
strong
, the aggregator always concludes in 2-5s, blocking wall clock is
31 seconds
strong
when skipping against a median PR dwell of 21.9m, and Elixir-running PRs dwell
24.5m against skippers' 20.4m - a four-minute difference, not the sixteen wave 3
assumed (it conflated the job with the suite). And on an
unprotected
strong
base
--auto
code
does not queue - it merges
immediately, exit 0, silently
strong
: probe PR #6649 landed on main before its checks completed.

Decision reversed: allow_auto_merge stays FALSE.
strong

## REFUTED: D43's stated reason for the freeze - the remedy got harder, then the
cost got smaller

D43 says a pre-shim head cannot render
Elixir gate
code
because a pull_request run executes the workflow file on the HEAD. An empty
commit pushed to #5754 rendered it in
35 seconds
strong
- GitHub selects the workflow file from the
merge ref
strong
. But it rendered RED, and no push can green it: the dispatcher pins
ref: head.sha
code
and runs
scripts/elixir-path-escape-check.sh
code
, a script the shim commit itself introduced, so a pre-shim head tree gives
exit 127
code
and the aggregator fail-closes. A perfect 16/16 biconditional holds across every
open PR: PRE-shim implies NO-SCRIPT implies gate ABSENT-or-RED.
The cure is a rebase, never a push.
strong

But the cost is far smaller than D43 priced. Re-derived per head: only
THREE
strong
open PRs are simultaneously MERGEABLE and rendering zero gate (#6055, #6053,
#6028). The other seven absent-gate PRs are already CONFLICTING - and a
conflicting PR is
dark, not slow
strong
: #6057's pushed head produced
zero
strong
Actions runs over 11.5 minutes (total_count 0, merge_commit_sha null). They are
unmergeable today under no protection at all, so counting them as strand cost
double-counts an existing wall.

The unfreeze is not a precondition. It is three rebases and a lead triage
action.
strong

## The lease: three obvious candidates, all refuted by count

current 6h grace
20
reds correct work; already red on 8 of 15 open PRs
P1 assignee-backed
108
TAUTOLOGICAL - a gate that cannot red (D8)
P3 goal delegation
0
rescues nothing, and is time-varying
P2 renew-on-push
n/a
fences the holder out of their own close
P4 live-when-opened
strong
11 of 13 open PRs
strong
SHIPS - refuses exactly the two abandoned epics
strong
Candidate
strong
Passes, of 109 open lapsed tasks
strong
Verdict
strong

P1's agreement is not empirical, it is
tautological
strong
:
do_claim
code
writes
assignee
code
and
claim.worker
code
from the same
worker_id
code
, and the reap deliberately preserves the assignee - 275 agree,
zero disagree
strong
, across all 3,363 ledger tasks. P4 measures against the PR's own
created_at
code
, which cannot decay with review dwell. Its cost is stated, not smuggled: it
certifies
opened under a live claim
strong
, not still being worked.

## The break-glass: one criterion unsatisfiable, one property 0% built

- Criterion 8 cannot be satisfied. strong The owner is a User, so orgs/, users/
and repos/.../audit-log all 404; /activity carries only branch/push/merge; there
are zero webhooks; and the protection object carries no actor and no timestamp
at all strong . A full PUT/DELETE/POST cycle ran on a throwaway branch and left
no trace anywhere.

- The scream does not exist. strong The verify SCRIPT is healthy - a simulated
glass-open exits 1 naming the enforce_admins drift. The WORKFLOW is not:
job-level continue-on-error code , paths-filtered on both triggers, no schedule
and no workflow_dispatch. Only 3 of the last 60 merged PRs strong touch
.github/**, so it is silent on ~95% of merges.

- Recording is 0% built, not 70%. strong --disable code removes ALL protection;
the narrow form is two raw gh api lines inside a comment, with no reason, no
task id and no record.

- The hotfix! label does not exist. strong gh label list --limit 200 code finds
no hotfix label - D49's named exit is inapplicable, not merely silent.

Criterion 8 cannot be satisfied.
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
The owner is a User, so orgs/, users/ and repos/.../audit-log all 404; /activity
carries only branch/push/merge; there are zero webhooks; and the protection
object carries
no actor and no timestamp at all
. A full PUT/DELETE/POST cycle ran on a throwaway branch and left no trace
anywhere.
The scream does not exist.
The verify SCRIPT is healthy - a simulated glass-open exits 1 naming the
enforce_admins drift. The WORKFLOW is not: job-level
continue-on-error
code
code
code
, paths-filtered on both triggers, no schedule and no workflow_dispatch. Only
3 of the last 60 merged PRs
touch .github/**, so it is silent on ~95% of merges.
Recording is 0% built, not 70%.
--disable
removes ALL protection; the narrow form is two raw gh api lines inside a
comment, with no reason, no task id and no record.
The hotfix! label does not exist.
gh label list --limit 200
finds no hotfix label - D49's named exit is inapplicable, not merely silent.
bullet

## The refusal grammar: the exit code is a constant, and D38 is missing the most
common shape

Ten rows captured verbatim on a freshly protected throwaway base.
Every refusal exits 1
strong
- deadlock, red, cancelled, pending, plural, and gh's own client-side block. So
the artifact must regex stderr; there is no numeric shortcut.

N=1 never reports
Required status check "X" is expected.
DEADLOCK - no merge command fixes it
N=1 red
... is failing.
re-run FIRST (D57 laundering), then read the diff
N=1 cancelled
... is cancelled.
gh run rerun <id>
N=1 pending
strong
... is in progress.
strong
WAIT - absent from D38, most common state
strong
N=2 mixed
2 of 2 ...: 1 expected and 1 failing.
names nothing; fall through to set-difference
no flags, blocked
... base branch policy prohibits the merge.
client-side; never reached the API
GREEN, plain --squash
strong
(no output), exit 0, MERGED
strong
graceful degradation PROVEN
strong
State
strong
Refusal string
strong
The one resolving command
strong

A trap worth naming:
strong
the plural categories
do not sum
strong
-
2 of 2 ... have not succeeded: 1 expected.
code
silently absorbs the pending one, so a parser computing total-minus-named == 0
mis-handles the single most common state.

## Smaller findings that changed slice scope

- The detector is blind to cancellation. strong --deadlock code returns EXIT 3
naming the missing context on frozen heads - but it matches on the name column
only, discarding the conclusion it already computes. On head 5ea4cb4f, whose
required task gate concluded cancelled, it returns EXIT 0, shape-identical to
green strong .

- The generator has a silent downgrade and no floor. strong Three post-shim
heads regenerate byte-identically to the committed two names. Mixing ONE
pre-shim head emits a single name, exit 0, empty stderr strong . Eleven flags
exist and none is a cardinality guard.

- hgw3-s7's own gate cannot fail. strong node --check code exits 0 on the
workflow file with a deliberate syntax error appended - a file with both a
top-level export and a top-level return defeats it. The gate written into
plan.md exits 1 on unmodified main strong . Both broken, in opposite directions.

- CLAUDE.md orders an infinite fight. strong "If push fails, resolve and retry
until it succeeds." Under protection that is a GH006 loop - and the file has
eight bytes strong of budget headroom, so the rewrite must replace, never
append.

- The gate's missing branch only ever lies. strong It is reachable solely via a
200-with-null; both genuine cases return 404 and are owned by a different
branch. Deleting it is worse than rerouting - the emitter falls through to the
lifecycle catch-all and prints a second strong , worse false accusation.

- D48's 253/68 is the wrong census. strong That is the stale-NAME count for
'Elixir Test'. The merge-verb population is four live in-repo sites - and seven
strong out-of-repo files, not one.

- The D36 mirror hole is real but is not a flip blocker. strong Giving the
unfiltered ratchet a compile-output gate passes 101/101 strong while the
aggregator greens on a docs-only PR. It is a false-GREEN, so it degrades safety
not availability, and it needs another elixir.yml edit to go live.

- Main is GREEN, strong read by the honest three-state rule: newest main push
with a terminal non-cancelled conclusion is 69a9d591d, Elixir gate success at
12:49:03Z. A naive tip read manufactures a false red, because queued main runs
collapse by design.

The detector is blind to cancellation.
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
--deadlock
code
code
returns EXIT 3 naming the missing context on frozen heads - but it matches on
the name column only, discarding the conclusion it already computes. On head
5ea4cb4f, whose required task gate concluded cancelled, it returns
EXIT 0, shape-identical to green
.
The generator has a silent downgrade and no floor.
Three post-shim heads regenerate byte-identically to the committed two names.
Mixing ONE pre-shim head emits
a single name, exit 0, empty stderr
. Eleven flags exist and none is a cardinality guard.
hgw3-s7's own gate cannot fail.
node --check
exits 0 on the workflow file with a deliberate syntax error appended - a file
with both a top-level export and a top-level return defeats it. The gate written
into plan.md exits 1 on
unmodified main
. Both broken, in opposite directions.
CLAUDE.md orders an infinite fight.
"If push fails, resolve and retry until it succeeds." Under protection that is a
GH006 loop - and the file has
eight bytes
of budget headroom, so the rewrite must replace, never append.
The gate's missing branch only ever lies.
It is reachable solely via a 200-with-null; both genuine cases return 404 and
are owned by a different branch. Deleting it is worse than rerouting - the
emitter falls through to the lifecycle catch-all and prints a
second
, worse false accusation.
D48's 253/68 is the wrong census.
That is the stale-NAME count for 'Elixir Test'. The merge-verb population is
four live in-repo sites - and
seven
out-of-repo files, not one.
The D36 mirror hole is real but is not a flip blocker.
Giving the unfiltered ratchet a compile-output gate passes
101/101
while the aggregator greens on a docs-only PR. It is a false-GREEN, so it
degrades safety not availability, and it needs another elixir.yml edit to go
live.
Main is GREEN,
read by the honest three-state rule: newest main push with a terminal
non-cancelled conclusion is 69a9d591d, Elixir gate success at 12:49:03Z. A naive
tip read manufactures a false red, because queued main runs collapse by design.
bullet

## Coverage, including the not-founds

- No audit-log endpoint of any kind exists on this repo - three paths probed,
all 404. This is a negative that rewrites an acceptance criterion strong .

- No branch_protection_rule usage anywhere in .github/; zero webhooks; the
events feed carries no such type. Unprovable before the flip, and an edge
trigger regardless.

- No script, Makefile target or workflow in this repo merges a PR - the artifact
lands in an empty namespace with one caller class, the lead.

- Neither local-update.sh nor pds-window-sentinel.sh contains any git push - no
unattended pusher exists.

- No prior-art task owns the lease-predicate decision, the firing-surface
question, or the third-argument hole - all three are fresh.

- Honest gap: strong the merge-main cure is one push short of L1. The exit-127
cause was proven removable, but #5754 turned out byte-identical to main so its
dispatcher then failed on an empty diff. Treat 'rebase cures it' as strongly
implied, not measured.

- Honest gap: strong repo settings were being mutated concurrently by a sibling
agent - allow_auto_merge read false, then true, then false again in one phase.
Any single settings read this afternoon is L3, so the flip re-derives everything
immediately before the PUT.

No audit-log endpoint of any kind exists on this repo - three paths probed, all
404. This is a
negative that rewrites an acceptance criterion
strong
strong
strong
.
Honest gap:
Honest gap:
the merge-main cure is one push short of L1. The exit-127 cause was proven
removable, but #5754 turned out byte-identical to main so its dispatcher then
failed on an empty diff. Treat 'rebase cures it' as strongly implied, not
measured.
repo settings were being mutated concurrently by a sibling agent -
allow_auto_merge read false, then true, then false again in one phase. Any
single settings read this afternoon is L3, so the flip re-derives everything
immediately before the PUT.
bullet

## Decisions

Charter D50 through D73, written to .claude/workflows/bp-honest-gates-charter.md
and published to origin/main as 117e6fe91. Each with its one line of why; the
charter is the epic's memory, this is the wave's story.

- Protection ships, round 2, after exactly three slices. strong Not timidity:
the wave's own DONE bar demands a merge verb that is not --admin and a glass
that cannot be left open, and requiring a gate measured to be lying today reds 8
of 15 PRs.

- The merge verb becomes an executable artifact. strong A prose merge protocol
has no population and no ratchet - it is the exact predicate class this epic
exists to abolish.

- allow_auto_merge stays FALSE. strong Its mandatory mitigation is a proven
placebo, its throughput case is refuted, and on an unprotected base it merges
instantly and silently.

- The lease becomes P4. strong The only candidate that discriminates: it cannot
decay with review dwell, and it cannot become permanently true.

- The break-glass writes its record BEFORE the DELETE. strong A crash between
them must leave a false-positive record, never a silent open - because GitHub
itself records nothing at all.

- The scream is a separate, level-triggered workflow. strong An edge trigger
fires once and is silent forever; and un-advisory-ing the existing drift job
would make an API-reading check eligible for the required set on flip day.

- The format ceiling is DROPPED. strong It never landed on main, so deferring
costs nothing - and the un-wired shape is the dangerous one, because the
generator would promote a green un-subsumed check into the required set with
nobody deciding.

- The D36 mirror hole goes to backlog. strong A false-GREEN degrades safety, not
availability, and it is unreachable without another aggregator edit.

- BARKPARK_TASK_TOKEN is refused. strong The only mintable credential is the
fleet's admin token, in a public repo's secrets - and the auto-file would write
an invisible draft anyway.

- Criterion 8 is rewritten, not waived. strong Attributability moves to a record
the glass cannot skip, because the audit log it named does not exist.

Protection ships, round 2, after exactly three slices.
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
strong
Not timidity: the wave's own DONE bar demands a merge verb that is not --admin
and a glass that cannot be left open, and requiring a gate measured to be lying
today reds 8 of 15 PRs.
The merge verb becomes an executable artifact.
A prose merge protocol has no population and no ratchet - it is the exact
predicate class this epic exists to abolish.
allow_auto_merge stays FALSE.
Its mandatory mitigation is a proven placebo, its throughput case is refuted,
and on an unprotected base it merges instantly and silently.
The lease becomes P4.
The only candidate that discriminates: it cannot decay with review dwell, and it
cannot become permanently true.
The break-glass writes its record BEFORE the DELETE.
A crash between them must leave a false-positive record, never a silent open -
because GitHub itself records nothing at all.
The scream is a separate, level-triggered workflow.
An edge trigger fires once and is silent forever; and un-advisory-ing the
existing drift job would make an API-reading check eligible for the required set
on flip day.
The format ceiling is DROPPED.
It never landed on main, so deferring costs nothing - and the un-wired shape is
the dangerous one, because the generator would promote a green un-subsumed check
into the required set with nobody deciding.
The D36 mirror hole goes to backlog.
A false-GREEN degrades safety, not availability, and it is unreachable without
another aggregator edit.
BARKPARK_TASK_TOKEN is refused.
The only mintable credential is the fleet's admin token, in a public repo's
secrets - and the auto-file would write an invisible draft anyway.
Criterion 8 is rewritten, not waived.
Attributability moves to a record the glass cannot skip, because the audit log
it named does not exist.
bullet

## The wave plan - 7 slices, 2 rounds

Round 1 is five file-disjoint slices. Round 2 is the flip plus the hotfix lane,
dispatched by the lead once their dependencies MERGE.

S1
hgw4-s1-task-gate-honest-predicate
1
fable
bash scripts/pr-task-gate.test.sh
S2
hgw4-s2-merge-verb-artifact
1
fable
bash scripts/bp-merge.test.sh
S3
hgw4-s3-breakglass-recorded-and-screaming
1
fable
bash scripts/breakglass.test.sh
S4
hgw4-s4-claude-md-push-under-protection
1
opus
bash scripts/check-doc-budgets.sh
S5
hgw3-s7-charter-via-pr
1
opus
bash scripts/workflow-module-smoke.sh
S6
strong
hgw2-s7-enable-branch-protection
strong
2, after S1+S2+S3
strong
fable
bash scripts/required-checks-verify.sh --ci
S7
hg-bl-hotfix-breakglass-records-nothing
2, after S1
opus
bash scripts/pr-task-gate.test.sh
#
strong
Task
strong
Round
strong
Model
strong
Gate
strong

HIGH-FLIP-RISK, independent second re-derivation owed before merge:
strong
S1 (is P4 the honest predicate, or does it merely move the lie?) and S6 (is the
regenerated required set genuinely two names, or a silently downgraded one?).

Fable is unavailable this session
strong
- every fable-marked slice dispatches on Opus. The marking records the honest
difficulty judgment, not an expectation.

Lead actions this wave cannot do from a worktree:
strong
the seven out-of-repo memory files
(hgw4-bl-memory-merge-population-seven-files), the open-PR triage
(hgw4-bl-open-pr-triage-under-protection), merging #6414 and closing
hgw2-s5-ci-verdict-reader on its claim epoch, and deleting the
probe-automerge-clean residue repo.

The plain sentence this wave must end:
nothing in this repo is required-by-name, and every ratchet waves 1-3 built is
advisory.
strong
It is still true as these slices dispatch. S6 is what makes it false - and S1,
S2 and S3 are what make S6 honest rather than a fifth deferral wearing a
different hat.

## Corrections to earlier sections of this Paper (2026-07-28, Review)

This Paper is the wave's living story, so where a later phase invalidated an
earlier claim the earlier claim is corrected here with a date rather than
silently rewritten. Three sections above were overtaken by their own wave.

THE DIRECTION SECTION SAID THE MERGE VERB WOULD HAND OFF TO AUTO-MERGE. It
reads: 'if the wait exceeds the budget it hands off to GitHub's own auto-merge
and says so.' That was REVERSED by D53 and by the wish's own sharpest objection.
What shipped refuses to hand off: over budget it prints the PR URL and the
re-run command and exits 2, and allow_auto_merge stays FALSE. The reason is
measured, not aesthetic — gh forwards expectedHeadOid to the enable mutation and
GitHub accepts-and-ignores it, so the pin is a placebo and the flag is
unreadable afterwards. Write-only safety is not safety, and widening what can
land unattended inside a wave whose purpose is narrowing it was the wrong trade.
THE DIRECTION SECTION SAID THE BREAK-GLASS WRITES ITS RECORD TO THE LEDGER. It
reads: 'writes the record to the ledger first, then DELETEs enforce_admins.'
REVERSED by D49: the sink is the committed docs/ops/break-glass-log.md. A
recorder that needs a healthy remote is a recorder that is absent exactly when
it matters — and bp task create returned 500s and timeouts again during this
very wave, twice, to a builder and then to the reviewer. The ordering claim
(record first, DELETE second) survives verbatim; only the sink changed.
THE DIRECTION SECTION SAID THE VERIFY GUARD WOULD BE THE SCREAM. It reads:
'while it is open, the required-checks verify guard reds in CI.' REVERSED by
D61: that guard reads three endpoints and is paths-filtered, so making it hard
would have made an API-reading check eligible for the required set on flip day.
The scream shipped as a separate, narrow, one-endpoint watch on its own
schedule, and required-checks-drift.yml was deliberately left carrying its
continue-on-error.

## DEBRIEF — round 1 shipped, grade B+

Written 2026-07-28 by the wave reviewer, the last hands before merge. Five
slices were built, reviewed adversarially, fixed in place, gate-re-run, pushed,
and opened as PRs #6684-#6688, with the charter wave-log riding #6689. Round 1
of two is complete.

THE PLAIN SENTENCE SURVIVES A FOURTH TIME, and honesty requires it be the first
line of the debrief and not a footnote: gh api
repos/FRIKKern/barkpark/branches/main/protection still returns 404, rulesets
still returns [], and every ratchet waves 1-4 built is still ADVISORY. hgw2-s7
is round 2 by the sequenced-rounds law — gated on three of these five merging —
so its absence from this run is the law working rather than a fifth deferral.
But the wish asked for teeth, and this wave delivers the mouth, the jaw and the
dentist's appointment. What is genuinely different from the three prior
deferrals is that the reasons are now ARTIFACTS ON BRANCHES rather than
ARGUMENTS IN A CHARTER.

Slice
Final branch / PR
Verdict
S1 task-gate honest predicate
…the-task-gate-stops-lying-twice-the-leas-0-r · #6684
D58 + D59. LAPSE_GRACE_SECONDS deleted outright; the open branch tests
claim.expired_at >= pull_request.created_at, PR_OPENED_AT plumbed from the
payload, absent-or-unparseable is a REFUSAL not a fall-open. The -300s
future-clock floor and the released_at >= expired_at ordering clause survive and
are re-proven load-bearing under P4. missing reroutes to UNCHECKED. 62 -> 73
fixtures, six mutation proofs, three re-run independently by the reviewer.
S2 merge-verb artifact
…the-fleet-s-merge-verb-becomes-one-execu-1-r · #6685
D53-D57. bp-merge.sh: deadlock pre-flight by CALLING the detector, bounded
attended wait, plain gh pr merge --squash. Neither --admin nor --auto on any
executable line, grepped as a ratchet. Seven-state refusal table keyed on the
STRING, plural before singular, is-in-progress present, UNRECOGNISED refuses
loudly. And D56: the detector returned EXIT 0 on a required context concluding
cancelled, shape-identical to green on a frozen head, proven live on 5ea4cb4f.
S3 break-glass + scream
…a-break-glass-that-cannot-open-without-w-2-r · #6686
D49 + D60 + D61. The record is written AND acknowledged off disk BEFORE the
DELETE, proven at the API call by snapshotting the log inside the gh stub rather
than reading source. --close inverts the order on purpose so a crash
over-reports. Sink is a committed file. A separate level-triggered watch, no
continue-on-error anywhere, one endpoint, two authorities. Reviewer fixed a
shipping-blocker. 54 -> 55.
S4 CLAUDE.md under protection
…claude-md-stops-ordering-an-infinite-fig-3-r · #6687
D67. Two single-line hunks inside eight bytes of headroom: step 4 branches on
ref, and 'retry until it succeeds' becomes 'a push protection refusal (GH006) is
CORRECT, not a retry cue'. Ownership sentences survive verbatim; Golden Rules
untouched.
S5 (hgw3-s7) charter via PR
…the-epic-cycle-decide-phase-stops-direct-4-r · #6688
D66. Both prior gates for *.workflow.js re-derived broken in OPPOSITE
directions; workflow-module-smoke.sh replaces them, mutation-proven on four
files. Decide publishes the charter as a docs-only PR from its own worktree, and
charter_pr is a REQUIRED schema field so 'the phase reports the PR' cannot
degrade into 'the phase claims success'. Reviewer closed the regression it
introduced.

### What the reviewer fixed in place — seven defects

One of them would have shipped a scream that never runs. Two are the epic's own
disease inside the slices built to cure it.

S3's watch workflow was UNPARSEABLE. It declared administration: read under
permissions:. That scope is not one GITHUB_TOKEN accepts, so GitHub rejects the
whole file and the workflow NEVER RUNS — a scream that is silent by
construction, inside the slice built to abolish silence. bash -n and all 54
script assertions stayed green straight through it, because a script harness
cannot catch a YAML defect: D26's own lesson, recurring one wave later. Removed,
with the consequence written down rather than papered over — branch-protection
reads need repo-admin scope that no permissions: key can grant, so the live
authority is UNARMED until a BREAKGLASS_TOKEN secret exists and the
committed-log authority carries the check. New harness row 6.8b validates every
scope against GitHub's accepted set; mutation-proven by re-adding the scope.
S2's RE-RUN set refused heads GitHub would merge. skipped was in the
cancelled-class set as the builder's own stated widest guess. GitHub counts a
required check concluding skipped as SATISFYING protection, so the merge verb
would have refused a mergeable head. A lie in the opposite direction is still a
lie, and in a wrapper whose whole promise is that it never lies about the merge
it is the worst possible place for one. Removed; probe 16/16 pins it from both
sides.
S5's own change silently staled the charter for every builder. Publishing by PR
means the charter is not on origin/main while the wave flies, and the Build and
Review prompts still said 'Read the epic charter at <path> first' from a
worktree branched off origin/main — returning the PREVIOUS wave's charter,
plausibly and without a symptom. Both prompts now interpolate the open PR, say
the local copy is stale, and point at this Paper; the Review prompt additionally
routes the wave-log append onto the charter PR's branch, because appending to a
stale local main would drop the charter changes on the floor.
S1's doc twin was left contradicting the code it documents.
docs/ops/merge-gates.md section 7 still described the 6h grace and a tunable
deleted from every file in the tree. Rewritten to the D58 rule, the refusal, the
floor, the stated narrowing cost, and D59.
S3's residual list claimed three gaps and had five. The unpushed-record window
and the unarmed live authority are now stated in numbers. An incomplete residual
list is itself a residual.
S4's replacement clause was ungrammatical ('a push protection refuses (GH006) is
CORRECT') in a sentence an agent reads while blocked. Byte-neutral repair inside
four bytes of headroom.
Three --help handlers printed hard-coded line ranges that any comment edit above
would silently truncate. All three now print by shape and stop at the first
non-comment line.

### The wish's two open questions, both DECIDED rather than documented

AUTO-MERGE: NO, and the objection the wish raised against it is upheld. The wish
asked that auto-merge be decided with evidence and warned that it widens what
can land without a human inside a wave whose purpose is narrowing it. The wave
agreed and found the other path. allow_auto_merge stays FALSE; the throughput
problem it was meant to solve is answered by a BOUNDED ATTENDED WAIT instead —
bp-merge.sh polls within a budget, prints every cycle, merges the moment the
head goes green, and over budget refuses and hands the PR back to its author.
The residual is named rather than hidden: the loop re-attempts the merge each
poll, so a builder who runs it and walks away has a wait-length window in which
a merge happens unwatched. That is strictly narrower than auto-merge — bounded,
one PR, no queue, and it dies rather than persists — but it is not zero, and the
wave says so.

THE CLAIM-LEASE FALSE RED: DECIDED as P4, not documented again. The lease
predicate is now 'the claim was live when this PR was opened', and
LAPSE_GRACE_SECONDS is gone — there is no tunable left to argue about. The
reviewer re-derived the flip-risk judgment independently rather than re-reading
the builder: P4 is strictly MORE permissive than the 6h grace for long-lived PRs
and strictly LESS permissive for a PR opened after its claim had already lapsed.
The trade is defensible — the old predicate's verdict decayed with the wall
clock, so the same unchanged PR flipped green to red by sitting, which is a gate
lying about a PR rather than about a task, and a fixed stated narrowing beats a
time-varying one. But it is a permanently-open hole: once this check is
required, the cheapest way to satisfy it forever is to open the PR the moment
you claim. It is in the code comment, in the runbook, and here.

### Ledger audit

Clean on every slice, and honest about the one thing it could not do. All five
slice tasks are claimed, in_progress (never done), published, parented under the
epic, carrying this Paper, and stamped criterion-by-criterion AS THE WORK
HAPPENED rather than batched at the end — S1 7/8, S2 10/11, S3 9/10, S4 6/7, S5
6/7 — with every merge-gated criterion left OPEN for the lead and every unmet
criterion carrying an honest --miss note. The three deferred round-2 tasks are
open, unclaimed and untouched. No task outside this wave was modified.

hgw2-s5-ci-verdict-reader was CLOSED HONESTLY RATHER THAN CLOSED. The wish asked
for it, and the honest state is not 'done'. Criteria 6 and 7 were both
merge-gated halves the builder could only half-prove; the reviewer proved both
from PR #6414's LIVE state — the check run 'release-scan.sh CI-verdict
derivation' executed with conclusion SUCCESS (so the paths filter matched and
the harness really ran), the PR touches no file under tooling/grip/, and the
screen.mjs:555 finding is in the PR body at line 32, verbatim. That is 8 of 9
met. The ninth is 'PR merged to main', the lead's to close, and the task stays
in_progress because the work is not merged — writing done here would be exactly
the false-done shape this epic exists to kill. #6414 is green on BOTH required
contexts, the only open PR that is, and is therefore the natural 'merges once
green' specimen for the flip proof.

THE D49 CREATE REGRESSION HAS NOT CLEARED, and wave 3's wave-log note saying it
had is wrong. bp task create, bp doc create task and raw /v1/data/mutate creates
alternated between 'unknown error', HTTP 500 and client timeouts across FOURTEEN
reviewer attempts spanning about six minutes, while reads, patches, publishes,
claims, stamps and pulses stayed healthy throughout — the same asymmetry two
builders reported hours earlier. One task landed early in the window
(hgw4-bl-merge-verb-names-the-run-id, filed and published for the S2 builder
whose six attempts had failed); one did not. This is not a nuisance: 'PR
references an active task' is about to become required against this same host,
so an outage that blocks task CREATION becomes an outage that blocks a fleet
from opening PRs.

THE ITEM THAT ALMOST DID NOT MAKE IT ONTO THE BOARD — it is filed now, and the
fight to file it is itself the finding. hgw4-bl-disable-bypasses-recording-glass
is PUBLISHED, priority 1, parented under the epic, five acceptance criteria. It
took roughly TWENTY create attempts across two windows, and the call that
finally worked reported nothing: a later retry answered 'document already
exists', which is how the reviewer learned the draft had landed. THE TRAP WORTH
RECORDING FOR EVERY FUTURE PHASE: a bp create that REPORTS FAILURE may
nevertheless have landed as a draft, so read the draft back (bp doc get task
drafts.<id> --perspective raw) before re-filing, or you will conclude work is
unfiled when it is merely unpublished. The body:
scripts/required-checks-apply.sh --disable removes ALL branch protection after
nothing but --confirm and records nothing, so the recording invariant is a
MECHANISM for the narrow glass and only a CONVENTION for the total hammer;
breakglass.sh --close only POSTs enforce_admins and cannot repair a --disable.
Scoped honestly, because the builder overstated it: this is UNRECORDED, not
SILENT — breakglass-watch.sh reads UNPROTECTED and reds with 'BREAK-GLASS OPEN
(total)' when the committed spec says enforced=true, so the wish's 'impossible
to leave open silently' is actually satisfied; what is missing is attribution.
The fix is four steps, on the task. Fold it into hgw2-s7, which already touches
that script.

A LIVE GAP THE FLIP MUST ANSWER, found by this wave's own charter PR. #6689
carries the wave-log entry and its 'PR references an active task' check is RED —
correctly, by the gate's own rule. The only task it could honestly name is the
epic parent auth-totp-tests-are-time-boundary-flaky, which is an open, unclaimed
Goal. Under protection this PR could not merge, and both ways out are wrong:
claiming a long-lived Goal misrepresents its lifecycle, and naming a sibling
slice task is a lie. This is not hypothetical and it is not one PR's problem —
hgw3-s7 (#6688) routes EVERY future epic-cycle charter through exactly this
shape, so the day the task gate is required, every wave's own charter PR
deadlocks. Round 2 must decide it: either the epic-cycle files a per-wave
wave-log task, or the gate learns that a Goal-typed parent backs its own charter
PR. The five slice PRs (#6684-#6688) are all green on both required contexts, so
this is specific to the charter shape.

### Cross-slice integration

All five -r branches merge onto current origin/main with ZERO conflicts, and
every wave-4 gate is green in that one integrated tree: pr-task-gate 73/0,
bp-merge 28/0, required-checks selftest 16/16, break-glass 55/0, doc budgets
PASS, docs-anchors PASS, and module-scope smoke OK on all four workflow files.
The slices are genuinely file-disjoint, which is why the frontier dispatched
them in parallel and why they cohere: S2 and S3 both consume
required-checks-verify.sh but only S2 edits it, and S3's gate runs S2's selftest
against origin/main's copy, so the two agree in both directions.

The one coherence gap worth naming is not a conflict but an absence: nothing in
the repo POINTS at scripts/bp-merge.sh yet. bp-loop-ledger.md PROCESS RULE 2
still says gh pr merge --squash --admin, and merge-gates.md, felix.md and
connectors/README.md still carry the same folklore. That repointing is hgw2-s7's
own criterion 16 and lands with the flip by design — but until it does, the
fleet has a merge verb nobody has been told about.

### Grade: B+

What earns it. Every slice did the hard version. S1 could have widened the grace
to 24h and moved on; instead it DELETED the tunable and replaced a time-varying
predicate with a fixed one, then wrote the cost of that narrowing into the code
rather than into a changelog nobody reads. S2 could have been a bash alias;
instead it is a seven-state refusal table keyed on the string because the exit
code was measured to carry no information, with a pure classifier seam that lets
the whole table be harnessed over captured fixtures with no token — and along
the way it found that the deadlock detector was returning green on a permanently
frozen head. S3 proved its ordering claim AT THE API CALL by snapshotting the
log inside a gh stub, rather than asserting it from source, which is the
difference between a proof and a description. S5 refused to reinstate either of
the two broken gates it inherited and built a third. And four of five builders
named holes in their own work in writing, unprompted, including the two the
reviewer then had to close.

What holds it below an A. The wish's headline — INSTALL THE TEETH — did not
happen, and while the sequencing is correct and defensible, a wave graded
against this wish cannot call that a rounding error: protection is still 404 and
the fourth consecutive wave ends with every ratchet advisory. Beyond that, two
defects that reached the reviewer should not have. The invalid permissions scope
shipped a workflow that GitHub would have refused to parse — a scream that never
runs, in the slice whose entire subject is silence, and it is the SECOND wave in
a row where a YAML defect walked past a green script harness. And the skipped
conclusion shipped as an explicitly-labelled guess in a merge verb, where a
wrong guess means refusing a mergeable head. Both were found by reading, not by
any gate. There is also almost no live exercise anywhere in this wave:
bp-merge's merge_loop and preflight have never touched a real protected PR,
breakglass.sh has never run against the real repo, and the watch workflow has
never executed — every proof here is hermetic, which is honest but is not the
same as working.

One thing that is NOT held against the wave: the branches are pushed and the PRs
are open. Six consecutive waves ended with reviewed, gate-passing work sitting
on local-only branches in a shared checkout that other cycles reset. #6684
through #6689 exist.

### What the next wave takes

ROUND 2, in dispatch order, the moment its dependencies merge.
hgw2-s7-enable-branch-protection after S1 + S2 + S3 (#6684, #6685, #6686) — this
is THE FLIP and everything it was waiting for is now on a branch. Two
instructions the reviewer would add to its brief. First: run the throwaway-PR
proof THROUGH scripts/bp-merge.sh rather than around it, because S7's proof is
the only opportunity in sight to exercise the merge verb's live paths, and a
wrapper whose merge_loop has never run under enforce_admins is a wrapper the
fleet will discover is broken at the worst moment. Second: fold in
hg-bl-disable-bypasses-recording-glass, whose body is above, since S7 already
touches the apply script. Then hg-bl-hotfix-breakglass-records-nothing after S1
(#6684), which edits the same workflow file.

LEAD ACTIONS this wave could not do from a worktree: merge #6414 and close
hgw2-s5-ci-verdict-reader's ninth criterion on its claim epoch (8 of 9 are
stamped and waiting); dispatch the genuinely independent second review of S1's
P4 predicate, which this workflow structurally cannot spawn; provision the
BREAKGLASS_TOKEN secret, without which the scream's live authority is unarmed;
file hg-bl-disable-bypasses-recording-glass if the ledger recovers before S7
runs; and update the out-of-repo ~/.claude/CLAUDE.md:31 push mandate, which
still carries the pre-GH006 framing.

Wave 4 did not install the teeth. It built every tool the dentist refused to
work without, proved each one able to fail, and put them on branches with the
PRs open — including the one that would have gone in as a scream GitHub could
not even parse. The plain sentence is still true: nothing in this repo is
required-by-name. It is now false by three merges, and every one of them is a
link you can click.
